Document uv-with-Jupyter workflows (#7625)
astral-sh/uv: docs/guides/integration/jupyter.md

# Using uv with Jupyter

The [Jupyter](https://jupyter.org/) notebook is a popular tool for interactive computing, data
analysis, and visualization. You can use Jupyter with uv in a few different ways, either to interact
with a project, or as a standalone tool.

## Using Jupyter within a project

> If you're working within a [project](../../concepts/projects.md), you can kick off a Jupyter server

Reviewer: Just personal preference 
```suggestion
If you're working within a [project](../../concepts/projects.md), you can start a Jupyter server
```

with access to the project's virtual environment via the following:

```console

> $ uv run --with jupyter jupyter lab

Reviewer: Future: I wonder if we want `uvx --with-project jupyter lab`?

Author: Yeah I kinda like that. The repeated `jupyter` would be nice to avoid.

```

> Within the notebook, you can then import your project's modules as you would in any other `uv run`

Reviewer: "Within": Where's the notebook? Can we provide a link to the localhost URL where the notebook server starts by default then say "Within _a_ notebook".

Maybe instead of "any other `uv run` invocation" we should say "any other file in the project"?

invocation. For example, if your project depends on `requests`, `import requests` will import
`requests` from the project's virtual environment.

If you're looking for read-only access to the project's virtual environment, then there's nothing

> more to it. However, if you need to install packages from within the notebook, there are a few extra

Reviewer: Maybe

```suggestion
more to it. However, if you want to install additional packages from within the notebook, there are a few extra
```

details to consider.

### Creating a kernel

If you need to install packages from within the notebook, we recommend creating a dedicated kernel
for your project. Kernels enable the Jupyter server to run in one environment, with individual
notebooks running in their own, separate environments.

In the context of uv, we can create a kernel for a project while installing Jupyter itself in an
isolated environment, as in `uv run --with jupyter jupyter lab`. Creating a kernel for the project
ensures that the notebook is hooked up to the correct environment, and that any packages installed
from within the notebook are installed into the project's virtual environment.

To create a kernel, you'll need to install `ipykernel` as a development dependency:

```console
$ uv add --dev ipykernel
```

Then, you can create the kernel for `project` with:

```console

> $ uv run ipython kernel install --user --name=project

Reviewer: Could be cool to have a command that emits the project name, so you could do `--name=$(uv ...)` as a one-liner that actually works in any project.

```

From there, start the server with:

```console
$ uv run --with jupyter jupyter lab
```

> When you create a new notebook, you can then select the `project` kernel from the dropdown. You can

Reviewer: For consistency: "When creating a new notebook, select the `project` kernel from the dropdown"

> then use `!uv add pydantic` to add `pydantic` to the project's dependencies, or

Reviewer: "Then, you can use" or "Then use"

For example, running `!uv add pydantic` from within a notebook will add `pydantic` to the project's
dependencies and virtual environment, such that `import pydantic` will work immediately, without
further configuration or a server restart.

However, since the Jupyter server is the "active" environment, `!uv pip install` will install
package's into _Jupyter's_ environment, not the project environment. Such dependencies will persist
for the lifetime of the Jupyter server, but may disappear on subsequent `jupyter` invocations.

If you're working with a notebook that relies on pip (e.g., via the `%pip` magic), you can include
pip in your project's virtual environment by running `uv venv --seed` prior to starting the Jupyter
server. For example, given:

```console
$ uv venv --seed
$ uv run --with jupyter jupyter lab
```

Subsequent `%pip install` invocations within the notebook will install packages into the project's
virtual environment. However, such modifications will _not_ be reflected in the project's
`pyproject.toml` or `uv.lock` files.

## Using Jupyter as a standalone tool

If you ever need ad hoc access to a notebook (i.e., to run a Python snippet interactively), you can

> kick off a Jupyter server at any time with `uv tool run jupyter lab`. This will start a Jupyter

Reviewer: ```suggestion
start a Jupyter server at any time with `uv tool run jupyter lab`. This will run a Jupyter
```

via `!uv pip install`, or even `!pip install`.

## Using Jupyter from VS Code

You can also engage with Jupyter notebooks from within an editor like VS Code. To connect a
uv-managed project to a Jupyter notebook within VS Code, we recommend creating a kernel for the
project, as in the following:

```console
# Create a project.
$ uv init project
# Move into the project directory.
$ cd project
# Add ipykernel as a dev dependency.
$ uv add --dev ipykernel
# Open the project in VS Code.
$ code .
```

Once the project directory is open in VS Code, you can create a new Jupyter notebook by selecting
"Create: New Jupyter Notebook" from the command palette. When prompted to select a kernel, choose
"Python Environments" and select the virtual environment you created earlier (e.g.,
`.venv/bin/python`).

!!! note

    VS Code requires `ipykernel` to be present in the project environment. If you'd prefer to avoid
    adding `ipykernel` as a dev dependency, you can install it directly into the project environment
    with `uv pip install ipykernel`.

If you need to manipulate the project's environment from within the notebook, you may need to add

> `uv` as an explicit device dependency:

Reviewer 2: s/device/dev/

I like the new updates :slightly_smiling_face:

```console
$ uv add --dev uv
```

From there, you can use `!uv add pydantic` to add `pydantic` to the project's dependencies, or

> `!uv pip install pydantic` to install `pydantic` into the project's virtual environment without

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`!uv pip install pydantic` to install `pydantic` into the project's virtual environment without
updating the project's dependencies.
```

## As a standalone tool...

If you're working within a [project](../../concepts/projects.md), you can kick off a Jupyter server
with access to the project's virtual environment via the following:

```console
$ uv run --with jupyter jupyter notebook
```

Within the notebook, you can then import your project's modules as you would in any other `uv run`
invocation. For example, if your project depends on `requests`, `import requests` will import
`requests` from the project's virtual environment.

While `jupyter` itself is installed in an isolated environment when used via
`uv run --with jupyter`, within the notebook, `!uv add` and related commands will modify the
_project's_ environment.

For example, running `!uv add pydantic` from within a notebook will add `pydantic` to the project's
dependencies and virtual environment, such that `import pydantic` will work immediately, without
further configuration or a server restart.

!!! note

    Since the Jupyter server is running in an isolated virtual environment, `!uv pip install` will install package's
    into _Jupyter's_ environment, not the project environment. Such dependencies may disappear on subsequent `jupyter`

>     invocations. To install packages into the project environment, use `!uv add`.

Author: Actually, it looks like this is solvable using kernel `ipython kernel install` (https://github.com/astral-sh/uv/issues/6329#issuecomment-2302252543).

>     invocations. To install packages into the project environment, use `!uv add`.

Author: I sort of think we should _not_ be discovering the tool environment here, though. Modifying the project environment isn't great, but modifying the tool environment is even worse! It means subsequent users of the tool have these same modifications. I'd propose that we skip tool and ephemeral environments when considering active virtual environments. \cc @zanieb

# Using uv with Jupyter

There are a few critical considerations:

- Are you working with a project (in which case, you want `uv run`)? Or are you working with a
  standalone notebook (in which case, you want `uvx`)?
- Do you need to install packages from within Jupyter? Or is the environment read-only? The latter
  is way easier; the former requires some extra work.
- Are you trying to run Jupyter directly? Or through an editor, like VS Code?

## As a standalone tool...

If you're working within a [project](../../concepts/projects.md), you can kick off a Jupyter server
with access to the project's virtual environment via the following:

```console

> $ uv run --with jupyter jupyter notebook

Reviewer 2: I'm sure there are various opinions are about this, but `jupyter notebook` is the legacy interface and jupyterlab is the current interface. I don't know what relation other people have to this, would it give a better impression to use jupyterlab here? Command `jupyter lab`.

Author: Yeah I went back and forth. I'm fine to use `jupyter lab`, no big deal.

Reviewer 2: I think that's the best, and it's what jupyter promotes as #1

    invocations. To install packages into the project environment, use `!uv add`.

If you're working with a notebook that relies on pip (e.g., via the `%pip` magic), you can include
pip in your project's virtual environment by running `uv venv --seed` prior to starting the Jupyter
server. For example, given:

```console
$ uv venv --seed
$ uv run --with jupyter jupyter notebook
```

Subsequent `%pip install` invocations within the notebook will install packages into the project's
virtual environment. However, such modifications will _not_ be reflected in the project's
`pyproject.toml` or `uv.lock` files.

## As a project dependency...

## Within VS Code

```console
# Create a new notebook project
# and open the directory in code
$ uv init my-notebook
$ cd my-notebook
$ uv add ipykernel
$ code .
```

- Now that the new project directory is open in code, use the action "Create: New Jupyter Notebook"
- Click Select Kernel -> Python Environments
- Select the virtual environment that uv created. It will be named .venv/bin/python in this dropdown
  (or maybe .venv\Scripts\python on windows)

> If you don't `uv add ipykernel`, the notebook will fail to execute with an error.

Author: It would be nice if we could find a way to make this work without requiring that you install `ipykernel` into the project environment itself. (We don't want users to have to add `ipykernel` as a project dependency just to interact with their project in a notebook.)

Author: Well, if I'm working on a project, and I want to play with that project in a notebook, I don't want to add notebook dependencies as dependencies to the _project_. I don't want them recorded in the lock, etc.
